# population loss and cost burden

__motivation__

Housing affordability crises in destination cities like New York, Los Angeles, and San Francisco have gained increasing attention over the past year, as an influx of skilled workers has dramatically increased demand for housing, pushing rent increases far beyond wage growth for incumbent residents. Legacy cities losing population, in contrast, are often characterized as rich in low-cost housing, providing an affordable alternative to superstar cities and their astronomically priced units. As places lose population, so too do they lose demand for housing, lowering rents and home prices. Selective outmigration, however, often means that places losing population retain a large share of low-income households, for whom ostensibly low-cost housing can be unaffordable. Further, rent cannot fall below a certain threshold, as landlords have fixed housing costs. Inadequate demand in these cases often leads to abandonment, not less-costly housing. The relationship between population loss, decline and abandonment has been studied extensively in recent years, but there has been little work on the housing costs of remaining households. This research addresses this deficiency by examining trends in housing cost burden at the county and place scale between 2000 and 2016 and the separate mechanisms exacerbating cost burden in growing places, where rents are likely rising faster than income, and shrinking places, where incomes are falling faster than rent. A better understanding of the geographically heterogeneous drivers of uniformly high cost burden in the U.S. can inform locally tailored policy to tackle this crisis. 


<!-- The housing affordability crisis in fast-growing cities regularly makes headlines and are the subject of academic research. This study, on the other hand, examines cost burden in shrinking places, which the popular press often describes as awash in affordable housing. [$500 houses in Detroit, etc.] -->

__analysis__

Loss and growth counties and places appear to somewhat mirror each other in terms of loss places showing change in incomes falling further/faster than rent and growing places having rents growing further/faster than income. How can I move beyond this descriptive piece to hypothesis testing? The focus is on the role in population change, esp. the diff impacts of growth and loss on the joint relationship btw income and rent. What models does this suggest? Perhaps piecewise SUR examining impact of loss and growth separately on change income and rent, including controls like vacancy rate and baseline income and rent. The hypothesis would be that pop loss is linked to falling incomes and falling rent, but I really want to get at the joint relationship between these two things. How could I do this? Use some kind of ratio as DV? Categorical DV of income falling faster than rent?

__unit of analysis__

start w/ counties to build-out existing work on diversity, income inequality, and segregation. compare gaining and losing counties.

__measures__

The central construct is _affordability_. This is most often operationalized as percent of income spent toward housing. This is available by tenure and income. I am particularly interested in low-income households. One issue in comparing trends over time is that income tresholds are not directly comparable across censuses. I could instead count cost-burdened households using linear interpolation to count households below different AMI thresholds.

Cost burden itself might have no association with pop. change, but the mechanisms through which the level and trend of cost burden are produced may be different. In pop. loss places, I would expect burden to be a function of income falling faster than rent. In growing places, I would expect cost burden to be a function of rent growing faster than income. I need to look at these trends independent of census calculations for cost burden. I want median household income and median gross rent for all places. What other income measures are available? Quintiles are available in ACS, but not 2000 Census. Median household income _by tenure_.

* B25118: TENURE BY HOUSEHOLD INCOME IN THE PAST 12 MONTHS (IN 2016 INFLATION-ADJUSTED DOLLARS)
* B25119: MEDIAN HOUSEHOLD INCOME THE PAST 12 MONTHS (IN 2016 INFLATION-ADJUSTED DOLLARS) BY TENURE. HCT012 is comparable table in Census 2000	
* B25074. Household Income by Gross Rent as a Percentage of Household Income in the Past 12 Months. 

